As any Scrabble player knows, it is much easier to come up with words
that begin with a particular letter than to find words that have the same
letter in the third position. This is true for every letter of the alphabet. We
therefore expected respondents to exaggerate the frequency of letters
appearing in the first position—even those letters (such as K, L, N, R, V) which in fact occur more frequently in the third position. Here again, the
reliance on a heuristic produces a predictable bias in judgments. For
example, I recently came to doubt my long-held impression that adultery is more common among politicians than among physicians or lawyers. I had
even come up with explanations for that “fact,” including the aphrodisiac
effect of power and the temptations of life away from home. I eventually
realized that the transgressions of politicians are much more likely to be
reported than the transgressions of lawyers and doctors. My intuitive
impression could be due entirely to journalists’ choices of topics and to my
reliance on the availability heuristic. Amos and I spent several years studying and documenting biases of
intuitive thinking in various tasks—assigning probabilities to events,
forecasting the future, assessing hypotheses, and estimating frequencies.
In the fifth year of our collaboration, we presented our main findings in Science magazine, a publication read by scholars in many disciplines. The
article (which is reproduced in full at the end of this book) was titled
“Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.” It described the
simplifying shortcuts of intuitive thinking and explained some 20 biases as manifestations of these heuristics—and also as demonstrations of the role
of heuristics in judgment. Historians of science have often noted that at any given time scholars in
a particular field tend to share basic re share assumptions about their
subject. Social scientists are no exception; they rely on a view of human
nature that provides the background of most discussions of specific
behaviors but is rarely questioned. Social scientists in the 1970s broadly
accepted two ideas about human nature. First, people are generally
rational, and their thinking is normally sound. Second, emotions such as
fear, affection, and hatred explain most of the occasions on which people
depart from rationality. Our article challenged both assumptions without
discussing them directly. We documented systematic errors in the thinking
of normal people, and we traced these errors to the design of the machinery of cognition rather than to the corruption of thought by emotion. Our article attracted much more attention than we had expected, and it
remains one of the most highly cited works in social science (more than
three hundred scholarly articles referred to it in 2010). Scholars in other
disciplines found it useful, and the ideas of heuristics and biases have
been used productively in many fields, including medical diagnosis, legal
judgment, intelligence analysis, philosophy, finance, statistics, and military
strategy.
For example, students of policy have noted that the availability heuristic
helps explain why some issues are highly salient in the public’s mind while
others are neglected. People tend to assess the relative importance of
issues by the ease with which they are retrieved from memory—and this is
largely determined by the extent of coverage in the media. Frequently mentioned topics populate the mind even as others slip away from
awareness. In turn, what the media choose to report corresponds to their
view of what is currently on the public’s mind. It is no accident that
authoritarian regimes exert substantial pressure on independent media. Because public interest is most easily aroused by dramatic events and by
celebrities, media feeding frenzies are common. For several weeks after Michael Jackson’s death, for example, it was virtually impossible to find a
television channel reporting on another topic. In contrast, there is little
coverage of critical but unexciting issues that provide less drama, such as
declining educational standards or overinvestment of medical resources in
the last year of life. (As I write this, I notice that my choice of “little-covered”
examples was guided by availability. The topics I chose as examples are mentioned often; equally important issues that are less available did not
come to my mind.)
We did not fully realize it at the time, but a key reason for the broad
appeal of “heuristics and biases” outside psychology was an incidental
feature of our work: we almost always included in our articles the full text of
the questions we had asked ourselves and our respondents. These
questions served as demonstrations for the reader, allowing him to
recognize how his own thinking was tripped up by cognitive biases. I hope
you had such an experience as you read the question about Steve the
librarian, which was intended to help you appreciate the power of
resemblance as a cue to probability and to see how easy it is to ignore
relevant statistical facts.
The use of demonstrations provided scholars from diverse disciplines—
notably philosophers and economists—an unusual opportunity to observe
possible flaws in their own thinking. Having seen themselves fail, they
became more likely to question the dogmatic assumption, prevalent at the
time, that the human mind is rational and logical. The choice of method was crucial: if we had reported results of only conventional experiments,
the article would have been less noteworthy and less memorable.
Furthermore, skeptical readers would have distanced themselves from the
results by attributing judgment errors to the familiar l the famifecklessness
of undergraduates, the typical participants in psychological studies. Of
course, we did not choose demonstrations over standard experiments
because we wanted to influence philosophers and economists. We
preferred demonstrations because they were more fun, and we were lucky
in our choice of method as well as in many other ways. A recurrent theme
of this book is that luck plays a large role in every story of success; it is
almost always easy to identify a small change in the story that would have
turned a remarkable achievement into a mediocre outcome. Our story was
no exception.
The reaction to our work was not uniformly positive. In particular, our
focus on biases was criticized as suggesting an unfairly negative view of
the mind. As expected in normal science, some investigators refined our
ideas and others offered plausible alternatives. By and large, though, the
idea that our minds are susceptible to systematic errors is now generally
accepted. Our research on judgment had far more effect on social science
than we thought possible when we were working on it.
Immediately after completing our review of judgment, we switched our
attention to decision making under uncertainty. Our goal was to develop a
psychological theory of how people make decisions about simple
gambles. For example: Would you accept a bet on the toss of a coin where
you win $130 if the coin shows heads and lose $100 if it shows tails?
These elementary choices had long been used to examine broad
questions about decision making, such as the relative weight that people
assign to sure things and to uncertain outcomes. Our method did not
change: we spent many days making up choice problems and examining whether our intuitive preferences conformed to the logic of choice. Here
again, as in judgment, we observed systematic biases in our own
decisions, intuitive preferences that consistently violated the rules of
rational choice. Five years after the Science article, we published
“Prospect Theory: AnAnalysis of Decision Under Risk,” a theory of choice
that is by some counts more influential than our work on judgment, and is
one of the foundations of behavioral economics.
Until geographical separation made it too difficult to go on, Amos and I
enjoyed the extraordinary good fortune of a shared mind that was superior
to our individual minds and of a relationship that made our work fun as well
as productive. Our collaboration on judgment and decision making was the
reason for the Nobel Prize that I received in 2002, whichAmos would have
shared had he not died, aged fifty-nine, in 1996